VS-280 Create a VAT intermediary (#7657)
broadinstitute/gatk: scripts/variantstore/variant_annotations_table/README.md

# Creating the Variant Annotations Table

### The VAT pipeline is a set of WDLs
- [GvsCreateVAT.wdl](scripts/variantstore/wdl/GvsCreateVAT.wdl)
- [GvsValidateVAT.wdl](scripts/variantstore/variant_annotations_table/GvsValidateVAT.wdl)

The pipeline takes in a jointVCF and outputs a table in BigQuery.

**GvsCreateVAT** creates the table, while
**GvsValidateVAT** checks and validates the VAT

### Run GvsCreateVAT:

> Most of the inputs are constants — like the reference, or a table schema — and dont require any additional work (and paths can be found in the [example inputs json](scripts/variantstore/wdl/GvsCreateVAT.example.inputs.json)). However for the specific data being put in the VAT, three inputs need to be created.

Reviewer: Since we've been talking about this in refinement...etc. now might be a good time to either strip out inputs that can be hard-coded (maybe `table_suffix`) or just add as variables like `contig_array`.

Author: I want users to be able to name their VAT table...at least I thought I did....will users not want that?

Author: but for the reference I can hardcode it, and for the items in my scratch bucket, I feel weird about it, but I can hardcode those for now too

The first two of these inputs are two files — one of the file/vcf/shards you want to use for the VAT, and their corresponding index files. These are labelled as `inputFileofFileNames` and `inputFileofIndexFileNames`.

You will need to know where all of the GVS extract output files live.
Example of creating the files of file names and indices:
`gsutil ls gs://prod-drc-broad/beta-release-99k-v3/beta_99k_*.vcf.gz > inputFileofFileNames.txt`
`gsutil ls gs://prod-drc-broad/beta-release-99k-v3/beta_99k_*.vcf.gz.tbi > inputFileofIndexFileNames.txt`

> Those two created files will then need to get copied into a GCP bucket that this pipeline will have access to (eg. this bucket: `gs://aou-genomics-curation-prod-processing/vat/`)

Reviewer: I'm not sure all this explanation is necessary.  I think you can assume the user knows how to make a file with a list of absolute file paths in it and then, if it's a `File` input into a workflow, put it in a place where the workflow can access it.

Author: hahaha fiiine

> The third input is the ancestry file that Lee has made and it needs to be copied into a GCP bucket that this pipeline will have access to (eg. this bucket: `gs://aou-genomics-curation-prod-processing/vat/`) for easy access during the workflow. This input has been labelled as the `ancestry_file`.

Reviewer: Not sure how much clarity this adds, since it doesn't explain what data is in the ancestry file.

> Most of the other files are specific to where the VAT will live, like the project_id and dataset_name and the table_suffix which will name the VAT itself as vat_`table_suffix` as well as a GCP bucket location, the output_path, for the intermediary files and the VAT export in tsv form.

Reviewer: Is it TSV or CSV?
```suggestion
Most of the other files are specific to where the VAT will live, like `project_id`, `dataset_name` and the `table_suffix` which will create the VAT itself in the Google project `project_id`, as a table named vat_`table_suffix` in the dataset `detaset_name`. The input `output_path` is an absolute GCP path for the intermediary files and the VAT export in TSV format.
```

The other inputs can be copied from where I’ve put several files (maybe we should find a better place?!? Since many are in my scratch dir for now—tho anything in my scratch dir is also living in github as it’s things like what BQ schema is needed)

> The provided [example inputs json](scripts/variantstore/wdl/GvsCreateVAT.example.inputs.json) indicates all of the needed inputs.

Reviewer: Rather than direct the reader to yet another file, I think the comment about hard-coding or variable-izing (I know, not a word) makes more sense and would improve usability.

Author: great--I will hardcode for now and then move the files to a better place in the future. 

I wish WDLs could read from local files more easily

### Brief overview of the pipeline itself:

> - `MakeSubpopulationFiles` grabs Lee’s ancestry file and keeps only the columns it needs. It also grabs the File of shard names / paths. Each of those paths is then used to kick off one of the next step which is a subworkflow of three tasks. There will be a subworkflow for each vcf shard.

Reviewer: I think the comment inside the WDL ("the ancestry file is processed down to a simple mapping from sample to subpopulation") is enough explanation.  The user shouldn't need to understand the mechanics of this step.

  - `ExtractAnAcAfFromVCF` is the first step of the subworkflow and filters out bad sites, sites with too many alt alleles, duplicate variants and calculates the AC, AN and AF values for each subpopulation
  - `AnnotateVCF` is the second step of the subworkflow and adds Nirvana annotations to each of the variants

>   - `PrepAnnotationJson` is the final step and prepares the data to be loaded into a BQ table, and loads it into a GCP staging bucket, using the output_path

Reviewer: Again, I feel like the comments in the WDL where the sub-workflow is called are sufficient and this is not necessary here.

- `BigQueryLoadJson` creates BQ tables (two temporary and one that is the VAT) and then gets everything from the staging buckets (`genes` and `vt`) and loads it into the two temp tables in BQ. Those two tables are joined together to create the VAT.

- `BigQuerySmokeTest` checks that the number of variants in the new VAT is the same as the expected number from the many subworkflows. This will never fail the pipeline, but is helpful to validate results.

> - `BigQueryExportVat` takes the VAT and exports it by chromosome into a series of tsv files and loads it into a GCP bucket in the directory created by the `output_path`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `BigQueryExportVat` takes the VAT and exports it by chromosome into a series of tsv files and loads it into the GCP bucket  specified by the `output_path` workflow input.
```

The pipeline takes in a jointVCF and outputs a table in BigQuery.

**GvsCreateVAT** creates the table, while
**GvsValidateVAT** checks and validates the VAT

### Run GvsCreateVAT:

Most of the inputs are constants — like the reference, or a table schema — and dont require any additional work (and paths can be found in the [example inputs json](/scripts/variantstore/wdl/GvsCreateVAT.example.inputs.json)). However for the specific data being put in the VAT, three inputs need to be created.

The first two of these inputs are two files — one of the file/vcf/shards you want to use for the VAT, and their corresponding index files. These are labelled as `inputFileofFileNames` and `inputFileofIndexFileNames` and need to be copied into a GCP bucket that this pipeline will have access to (eg. this bucket: `gs://aou-genomics-curation-prod-processing/vat/`) for easy access during the workflow.
The third input is the ancestry file from the ancestry pipeline which will be used to calculate AC, AN and AF for all subpopulations. It needs to be copied into a GCP bucket that this pipeline will have access to. This input has been labelled as the `ancestry_file`.

> Most of the other files are specific to where the VAT will live, like the project_id and dataset_name and the table_suffix which will name the VAT itself as vat_`table_suffix` as well as a GCP bucket location, the output_path, for the intermediary files and the VAT export in tsv form.

Reviewer: I thought the export for the VAT was CSV not TSV?

To check that all of the shards have successfully made it past the first of the sub workflow steps (the most complicated and likely to fail) they will need to be annotated / transformed into json files and put here:
`gsutil ls  [output_path]/annotations/  | wc -l`

And then once they have been transformed by the python script and are ready to be loaded into BQ they will be here:
`gsutil ls  [output_path]/genes/  | wc -l`
`gsutil ls  [output_path]/vt/  | wc -l`

These numbers are cumulative. Also the names of these json files are retained from the original shard names so as to not cause collisions. If you run the same shards through the VAT twice, the second runs should overwrite the first and the total number of jsons should not change.
Once the shards have make it into the /genes/ and /vt/ directories, the majority of the expense and transformations needed for that shard are complete.

> They are ready to be loaded into BQ. You will notice that past this step, all there is to do is create the BQ tables, load the BQ tables, run a join query and then the remaining steps are all validations or an export into tsv.

Reviewer: CSV?
